For the direct infusion analysis of the fractions, a robotic nanoflow ion source TriVersa NanoMate (Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY, USA) was coupled to a high-field Q Exactive HF™ quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The dried samples were diluted in isopropanol (IPA)/MeOH/CHCl3 4:2:1 (v/v/v) containing 7.5 mM ammonium formate and 30 μL was placed in a 96-well twin.tec® plate (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Nano-electrospray ionization (nano-ESI) chips with spraying nozzles of 5 μm nominal internal diameter were used and the whole NanoMate was controlled by the Chipsoft 8.3.1 software (both Advion BioSciences). The following settings were applied: ionization voltage 1.25 kV(+)/− 1.25 kV (−); backpressure 0.9 psi; capillary temperature 250 °C; S-Lens radio frequency (RF) level 50.
ALEX software [24] was used for peak assignment of data acquired by FTMS and MS/FTMS (MS2) using an m/z tolerance of ± 0.0045 Da. Peaks with a mass deviation of more than 3 ppm were not considered. Species assignment included evaluation of production spectra (see Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM) Fig. S2). The assigned data were exported to Microsoft Excel 2010 and processed using self-programmed macros. For accurate quantification, intensities were corrected for type I isotope effects (relative isotope abundance; [25]). Type II corrections (overlap mainly resulting from 13C-atoms) were not required at the selected mass resolution due to peak coalescence (Hoering et al., manuscript in preparation). Quantification was performed by normalization of an analyte to internal standard intensities multiplied with the spiked amount of the internal standard as described recently [26]. Lipids were annotated as sum composition of acyl chains or without specification of sn positions using “_” as previously proposed [27].
Supervised machine learning was used to create an approach for automatic separation of recurrent from non-recurrent patients (20). The machine-learning algorithm was developed by presenting the results of the 19 steroid markers measured by GC-MS in given 24-hour urine, and the corresponding output, that is, a “yes” or “no” answer to the question of whether an ACC recurrence had been radiologically detected at the time of urine collection. From these “training” examples, the algorithm learned to generalize by finding patterns in the steroid data and use them to provide an output answer when the output is not known.
We used machine learning to approach 2 separate 2-class classification problems. First, we considered the differentiation of all 215 urine samples collected in the 39 non-recurred patients from all 76 urine samples collected post-recurrence in the 32 recurred patients. Second, to test the ability of our approach for very early detection, we aimed to differentiate all non-recurred samples against the first urine sample collected in each recurrent patient at the time of first radiological detection of ACC recurrence (35 samples, as 3 of 32 patients had 2 recurrences).
The cross-sectional study population included 259 subjects with normal or impaired fasting glucose or type 2 diabetes in whom skeletal muscle and whole-body insulin sensitivity (M-value) were measured during the euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp. Muscle glucose uptake (GU) was measured directly using [18F]FDG-PET. Serum metabolites were measured using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. We used linear regression to build the models for the muscle GU (Muscle-insulin sensitivity index [ISI]) and M-value (whole-body [WB]-ISI). The models were created and tested using randomly selected training (n = 173) and test groups (n = 86). The models were compared to common fasting indices of insulin sensitivity, homeostatic model assessment—insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), and the revised quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUICKI).
4.3.2. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
Water, acetonitrile, and methanol (LC-MS grade) were obtained from Merck Millipore (Warsaw, Poland). L-arginine, L-citrulline, ADMA, SDMA, hydrochloride salts of unlabeled DMA, hexadeutero-dimethylamine (D6-DMA, 99%), benzoyl chloride (BCl), sodium tetraborate, and formic acid (FA; HPLC grade) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Poznan, Poland). Isotope labeled ADMA (2,3,3,4,4,5,5-D7-ADMA, 98%), and L-arginine: hydrochloric acid (D7-arginine, 98%) were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Tewksbury, MA, USA). Leucine–enkephalin was obtained from Waters (Warsaw, Poland).
Serum concentrations of L-arginine/NO pathway metabolites were measured on a Xevo G2 quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) instrument (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) by stable isotope dilution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using a method developed in the laboratory of Medical Biochemistry Department [68]. In short, 100 μL of sera or calibration sample, 10 µL of an internal standard solution in water (20 µM D7-ADMA, 50 µM D6-DMA, and 100 µM D7-arginine), and 50 µL of borate buffer (0.025 M Na2B4O7·10H2O, 1.77 mM sodium hydroxide (NaOH), pH = 9.2) were vortexed (1 min, 1100 rpm, 25 °C) in polypropylene microtubes. Subsequently, 400 µL of acetonitrile and 10 µL of 10% BCl in acetonitrile were added and vortexed again (5 min, 1100 rpm, 25 °C). Following derivatization, samples were centrifuged (7 min, 4 °C, 15,000 × g) and 100 µL aliquots of supernatants were transferred into a chromatographic glass vial with 300 µL of water for subsequent LC-MS analysis, carried out using a nanoAcquity ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system, equipped with an Acquity HSS T3 column (50 mm × 1.0 mm, 1.75 μm) with 0.22 μm membrane inline filter (Waters). The total run time of the method was 10 min with a flow rate of 80 µL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, while mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA in methanol.